Update to the Overloads chapter (#1839)
python/typing: docs/spec/overload.rst

  def utf8(value):
      <actual implementation>

A constrained ``TypeVar`` type can sometimes be used instead of
using the ``@overload`` decorator. For example, the definitions

> of ``concat1`` and ``concat2`` in this stub file are equivalent::

Author: I'd prefer not to open that can of worms as part of the overload discussion. There are many open questions regarding constrained TypeVars that we need to tackle at some point, and I think the point you're raising here should be part of that discussion.

determine whether one or more of the overloads has a variadic parameter
(either ``*args`` or ``**kwargs``) that maps to a corresponding argument
that supplies an indeterminate number of positional or keyword arguments.
If so, eliminate overloads that do not have a variadic parameter.

- If this results in only one remaining candidate overload, it is
  the winning match. Evaluate it as if it were a non-overloaded function
  call and stop.
- If two or more candidate overloads remain, proceed to step 5.

Step 5: For each argument, determine whether all possible
:term:`materializations <materialize>` of the argument's type are assignable to
the corresponding parameter type for each of the remaining overloads. If so,
eliminate all of the subsequent remaining overloads.

For example, if the argument type is ``list[Any]`` and there are three remaining
overloads with corresponding parameter types of ``list[int]``, ``list[Any]``
and ``Any``. We can eliminate the third of the remaining overloads because
all manifestations of ``list[Any]`` are assignable to ``list[Any]``, the parameter
in the second overload. We cannot eliminate the second overload because there

> are possible manifestations of ``list[Any]`` (for example, ``list[str]``) that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are possible materializations of ``list[Any]`` (for example, ``list[str]``) that
```

Another important difference between type variables such as ``AnyStr``
and using ``@overload`` is that the prior can also be used to define
constraints for generic class type parameters. For example, the type
parameter of the generic class ``typing.IO`` is constrained (only
``IO[str]``, ``IO[bytes]`` and ``IO[Any]`` are valid)::

  class IO(Generic[AnyStr]): ...

> Invalid overload definitions

Reviewer 2: Should having a non-empty body for an ``@overload``-decorated definition be an error? E.g.,
```
@overload
def f(x: int) -> int:
    return x
@overload
def f(x: str) -> str:
    return x
def f(x):
    return x
```
The first two implementations are pointless and potentially misleading.

Author: Traditionally, it hasn't been flagged as an error. It will not lead to unsoundness or a runtime exception, so my inclination is to not mandate that type checkers flag it. Arguably, this is more appropriate for a linter. I guess I don't feel that strongly about it one way or another.

I'll note that the typing spec currently doesn't clearly define what "empty body" means, and mypy and pyright differ slightly on their definitions of this. This is on my list of items to discuss and unify, but it's been lower priority.

Reviewer 2: Fair enough! I don't feel strongly about this either, just a passing thought.

If an overload implementation is defined, type checkers should validate
that it is consistent with all of its associated overload signatures.
The implementation should accept all potential sets of arguments
that are accepted by the overloads and should produce all potential return
types produced by the overloads. In typing terms, this means the input
signature of the implementation should be :term:<assignable> to the input
signatures of all overloads, and the return type of all overloads should be
assignable to the return type of the implementation.

If the implementation is inconsistent with its overloads, a type checker
should report an error::

  @overload
  def func(x: str, /) -> str: ...
  @overload
  def func(x: int) -> int: ...

  # This implementation is inconsistent with the second overload
  # because it does not accept a keyword argument ``x`` and the
  # the overload's return type ``int`` is not assignable to the
  implementation's return type ``str``.
  def func(x: int | str, /) -> str:
    return str(x)

When a type checker checks the implementation for consistency with overloads,
it should first apply any transforms that change the effective type of the

> implementation including the presence of a ``yield`` statement in the

Reviewer: Is there a circumstance in which the presence of a `yield` in the body of a function changes the meaning of its return type annotation? My understanding is that it does not: a generator must be manually annotated with a `Generator` or `Iterator` return type. So I'm not sure how to write a test for this mention of "presence of a `yield` statement." Should this be removed from the text?

Author: You're correct, the presence of a `yield` statement doesn't change the effective type of the return type annotation. It does affect the inferred return type if the type checker (like pyright) implements return type inference. I think I meant to say "`async` keyword" rather than "`yield` statement". This should be changed in the spec.

Reviewer 3: `yield` does change the meaning of the return type for coroutines, right?

Author: The behavior of `yield` and its effects on the return type are not currently specified in the typing spec, but all major type checkers do change the meaning of the return type in this case.

Reviewer: > `yield` does change the meaning of the return type for coroutines, right?

Hmm, yes, I think it does. It requires you to annotate with `typing.AsyncGenerator`, which is _not_ implicitly wrapped in `Coroutine`, like the return type of an `async def` would be if it doesn't yield. So presence of `yield` in the body of an `async def` does have to be considered by a type checker when interpreting the return type. Which I guess means no change to the text here, and maybe a test should be added for this case.

implementation body, the use of ``async def``, and the presence of additional
decorators.

Overlapping overloads
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If two overloads can accept the same set of arguments, they are said

> to "partially overlap". If two overloads partially overlap, the return type

Author: @JelleZijlstra, @JukkaL, I want to confirm that you are OK with the proposed definition of "partially overlapping overloads" in light of the response @ilevkivskyi posted to [this mypy issue](https://github.com/python/mypy/issues/18581). I think Ivan's point is worth considering, although I'm not sure how to write the specification for "cases that could fool the type checker into choosing the wrong overload". Intuitively, I know what he means here, but a precise spec might be difficult to formulate. It looks from [this historical comment](https://github.com/python/mypy/issues/5119#issuecomment-393221830) that mypy contains quite a few rules and various exceptions to those rules.

Reviewer 3: How does pyright currently check overlapping overloads?

The text already contains a number of special cases (`__get__`, ignoring multiple inheritance, etc.). Also, it seems to me that overlap is a somewhat isolated issue; the rules we set out for evaluating overload calls still work even if some overloads overlap. It might be better then to leave the spec vague, saying that type checkers may choose to flag some unsafe overlaps, without trying to come up with precise rules.

Author: > How does pyright currently check overlapping overloads?

The implementation is complicated. It leverages assignability rules but internally sets a flag that changes some of the normal assignability rules. For example, normally `Any` is assignable to every other type, but when this flag is set, `Any` is not assignable to any type (even itself). There are a number of other changes in the algorithm, but they attempt to implement the behavior described in this PR. 

If we don't have agreement on the desired behavior, then I agree that it's best to keep the spec loose here. Actually, I'm not sure it makes sense to discuss it at all in the spec if we are not in agreement on the intended behavior. So maybe we should just delete that entire section and the corresponding conformance tests.

Author: I've deleted the section of the spec related to overlapping overloads since we weren't able to achieve consensus on this topic.

of the former overload should be assignable to the return type of the
latter overload. If this condition doesn't hold, it is indicative of a

> programming error and should be reported by type checkers. The purpose of

Author: There is no special handling for promotion types here, nor should there be.

You might find it useful to adopt a slightly different mental model for promotion types. When the identifier `float` appears in a type expression, a type checker will interpret it to mean "the set of all values that are instances of `float` or `int` or subtypes thereof". In other words, it is equivalent to the type described by `float | int`. This type follows all of the same rules as other types in the Python type system — including rules for assignability, overload call evaluation, overlapping overload detection, etc.

There is currently no way in the Python type system to describe the type "`float` but not `int`", but you can produce this type (at least in pyright) locally through type narrowing.

```python
def func(x: float):
    reveal_type(x)  # Equivalent to "float | int"
    y = x.bit_length()  # Error

    if isinstance(x, float):
        reveal_type(x)  # "float" but not "int"
    else:
        y = x.bit_length()  # OK
        reveal_type(x)  # int
```

this check is to prevent unsoundness of this form::

  @overload

>   def is_one(x: Literal[0]) -> Literal[True]: ...

Author: Yeah, I caught that typo when I was preparing for my recent talk, but I forgot to check in the fix. It's now done. Thanks for pointing it out.

  @overload
  def is_one(x: int) -> Literal[False]: ...

>   reveal_type(is_one(int(1)))  # Reveals Literal[False], but True at runtime

Reviewer 4: This unsoundness does not only constrain returns, but also other arguments. For example, let's consider [PEP 728's __extra_items__](https://peps.python.org/pep-0728/#requiring-type-compatibility-of-the-known-items-with-extra-items).

For example, given this example from the PEP:

```
class Movie(TypedDict, closed=True):
    name: str
    __extra_items__: bool
```

we could imagine what the `__setitem__` signature would be as an overload:

```
  @overload
  def __setitem__(self, key: Literal['name'], value: str) -> None: ...
  @overload
  def __setitem__(self, key: string, value: bool) -> None: ...
```

Where the unsoundness is exposed in a similar was as quoted, by exploiting `Literal['name'] <: str`.

```
key: str = 'name'
movie[str] = false
oops: str = movie['name']
```

Now, maybe this case would fall under the exemption below, as an exempted magic method. However, would we consider specifying that user-defined overloads constrain the arguments, like we have done for returns?

Reviewer: I think in your example you wrote `movie[str] =` where you meant `movie[key] =`?

(Still thinking about the underlying issue.)

Reviewer 4: Thanks! Updated the example.

Reviewer: I think for one thing, this suggests that the following line in PEP 728 requires more consideration:

> Different from index signatures, the types of the known items do not need to be assignable to the extra_items argument.

There is a soundness reason for this restriction in index signatures, and perhaps we should re-consider whether it is advisable to discard this restriction in PEP 728.

I agree that this is also a soundness issue for user-defined overloads in general. I think in order to close this hole, we would need to specify that if any argument type overlaps between two overloads, then the latter overload must accept all calls that would be accepted by the earlier overload. Does that seem right to you?

I think we would need some empirical testing to understand what the impact of such a specification would be on real-world overloads. It might not be too bad. But I suspect this should be handled as a separate change to the spec, since I think it would be a significant change to current type-checker behavior, whereas I think this PR mostly intends to clarify and specify existing behavior.

Reviewer: @samwgoldman I think at the last typing meetup, you mentioned that you'd be interested in further pursuing this question of how overlapping argument types in overloads constrain the types of other arguments? Since I'm writing up draft conformance-suite tests now, I'm curious if you've had a chance to do that yet, and have any proposals to present in that area.

(It may be that if this suggests new restrictions on overloads that aren't currently implemented by any type checker, it would be better to consider it as a separate change to the specification, rather than as part of this PR.)

Type checkers may exempt certain magic methods from the above check
for conditions that are mandated by their usage in the runtime. For example,
the ``__get__`` method of a descriptor is often defined using overloads
that would partially overlap if the above rule is enforced.

Type checkers may ignore the possibility of multiple inheritance or
intersections involving structural types for purposes of computing overlap.
In the following example, classes ``A`` and ``B`` could theoretically overlap

> because there could be a common type ``C`` that derives from both ``A`` and

Reviewer: The wording above is "If two overloads can accept the same set of arguments, they are said to 'partially overlap'." Perhaps we should clarify what a "set of arguments" means. If it means "a set of argument types", then one could say "what about an argument typed as `Never`?" But if by "set of arguments" we mean " some possible set of objects (inhabitants of types), one for each argument", the issue disappears: if any argument is typed as `Never`, that call corresponds to zero possible sets of arguments, and so plays no role in determining overlap.

I think the latter definition is the correct one for determining whether a pair of overloads should be considered to overlap.

> because there could be a common type ``C`` that derives from both ``A`` and

Author: Good suggestion. That's what I meant to say in the original wording, but I can see how my wording could be misinterpreted. This change would eliminate the ambiguity.

> because there could be a common type ``C`` that derives from both ``A`` and

Reviewer 5: > " some possible set of objects (inhabitants of types), one for each argument",

Yea that makes sense to me. But this would still include `Never`, i.e. the empty set of objects. Stated as "non-empty sets of objects" would avoid that.

> because there could be a common type ``C`` that derives from both ``A`` and

Reviewer: No, that's not what I meant, sorry -- there's still a confusion here over two uses of the word "set". It is used here to mean "one per argument", like a "collect one of each!" kind of set. We should probably avoid using "set" in this way entirely here.

What we mean to say is "is there any possible concrete call that could match more than one overload? If so, those overloads partially overlap" where by "concrete call" we mean "exactly one object per argument". A call, in this sense, does not involve any types (no "sets of objects"), just objects.

``B``, but type checkers may choose not to flag this as an overlapping

> overload::

Reviewer: I think we should be reluctant (that is, have very strong rationale) before we _require_ by spec that type checkers implement something that can easily give wrong results with reasonable code.

I think that overloads that are unsound in the face of multiple inheritance is a hole that we should aim to fix in the Python type system, so I would rather not specify that type checkers are required to leave this hole open.

> it's not possible to have a subclass of both `int` and `str`, but this can't be represented in the type system.

I think it can be represented in the type system, because it can be framed as a rule about `__slots__` compatibility (that's what it is at runtime). `__slots__` is visible on Python classes, and can also be included in stubs for C extension types. To do this without special-casing builtin types would require adding `__slots__` definitions to some builtin types in typeshed, but this seems doable.

> if there is evidence that some class inherits from both `A` and `B`

I'm not sure what this would mean for a library defining API functions that are called by clients. When type checking the library, there is no way to have evidence one way or another about which classes exist in the client.

The way to ensure that there is no such class is to mark either `A` or `B` as final, or use `__slots__` to ensure they can't be inherited together (if type checkers implement an understanding of how `__slots__` restricts multiple inheritance.)

> overload::

Author: Based on this discussion, I think it's best not to standardize the behavior for overlapping overloads at this time. In other words, I think we should delete this section. 

Standardizing overlapping overload behavior is much lower priority IMO than standardizing evaluation of calls that target overloads, so let's focus on the latter and try to get that over the finish line. We can revisit overlapping overload reporting in the future if there's a desire to do so.

  class A: ...
  class B: ...

  @overload
  def func(x: A) -> int: ...
  @overload
  def func(x: B) -> str: ...

If all possible sets of arguments accepted by an overload are also always
accepted by an earlier overload, the two overloads are said to "fully overlap".
In this case, the latter overload will never be used. This condition
is indicative of a programming error and should be reported by type
checkers::

  # These overloads fully overlap because the first overload
  # accepts all arguments accepted by the second overload.

  @overload
  def func[T](x: T) -> T: ...
  @overload

>   def func(x: int) -> int: ...

Author: > Do they also fully overlap if this second signature is changed to (x: int) -> bool, or (x: bool) -> int?

Yes. As stated in the spec, a signature "fully overlaps" an earlier signature if all possible sets of arguments accepted by an overload are also accepted by an earlier overload. That's the case here.

> And what'll happen if either int is replaced by Any?

Same.

> And how about when this second overload returns NoReturn or Any?

The return type is irrelevant for this rule. What matters are the parameter types (i.e. the _set of arguments it accepts_).

>   def func(x: int) -> int: ...

Reviewer 5: > > Do they also fully overlap if this second signature is changed to (x: int) -> bool, or (x: bool) -> int?
> 
> Yes. As stated in the spec, a signature "fully overlaps" an earlier signature if all possible sets of arguments accepted by an overload are also accepted by an earlier overload. That's the case here.

Hmm ok, so the requirement is a strict partial order on the parameters of the overloads; gotcha.

> > And what'll happen if either int is replaced by Any?
> 
> Same.

Wait, so the second overload here will never be used? 

```pyi
@overload
def func[T](x: T) -> T: ...
@overload
def func(x: Any) -> Any: ...
```
I see that can be concluded from the fact that `Any` is assignable to `T` (like `Never`), but at the same time it `T` can also be assigned to `Any`. And assuming that `Any` is a type, then `T` is the same as `Any`, but clearly that's not how `Any` is defined. Instead, `Any` is more like a nondeterministic superposition of all possible types, that when assigning (to) it (when it's "measured"), the measurement itself makes it "collapse" into the very type that measures it. 

S that means that the second function would also become "entangled" with the 2nd overload, which now also a superposition of "fully overlapping / not used" and "not fully overlapping / could be used". And since we're dealing with a superposition of all types here (`Any` could just as well be called Murphy), then unless the previous overload parameeters already covered all types (i.e. `x: object`), then `Any` should never be considered as fully-overlapping.

(woops, I ranted about quantum mechanics...)

considered for matching purposes. The implementation, if provided,
should be ignored for purposes of overload matching.

Step 1: Examine the argument list to determine the number of
positional and keyword arguments. Use this information to eliminate any
overload candidates that are not plausible based on their
input signatures.

- If no candidate overloads remain, generate an error and stop.
- If only one candidate overload remains, it is the winning match. Evaluate
  it as if it were a non-overloaded function call and stop.
- If two or more candidate overloads remain, proceed to step 2.

Step 2: Evaluate each remaining overload as a regular (non-overloaded)
call to determine whether it is compatible with the supplied
argument list. Unlike step 1, this step considers the types of the parameters
and arguments. During this step, do not generate any user-visible errors.
Simply record which of the overloads result in evaluation errors.

- If all overloads result in errors, proceed to step 3.
- If only one overload evaluates without error, it is the winning match.
  Evaluate it as if it were a non-overloaded function call and stop.

> - If two or more candidate overloads remain, proceed to step 4.

Reviewer: The separation of step 1 and step 2 here results in a more complex algorithm than if they were combined into "iterate the overloads looking for the first one that binds to the call without error, if none, issue a no-matching-overload error." Because in your typing-meetup presentation, you emphasized that we have a complex algorithm for overload matching due to legacy, I assumed that this complexity must originate from long-time mypy behavior. So I was surprised to find that while this algorithm matches [pyright behavior](https://pyright-play.net/?enableExperimentalFeatures=true&code=GYJw9gtgBALgngBwJYDsDmUkQWEMpgBuApiADZgCGAJgFC0ACRpFNt1xwUwAFAB4AuTChgBKKAFoAfMJgDaURVAB0q%2BkxLkqdDl16CoAZxggANFDhDUYyTOMh5SlWvq7u-KyKgAfIyfOWslAAvFAADOLSQb72jkpIXEiGqMaUKADGxPzm1qJxToogxDAAriAoUACMCkpFpeVQAESN9LRFJJRkAPrwCFm8leYATKKiQA), mypy [appears to use the simpler one-iteration combined algorithm](https://mypy-play.net/?mypy=latest&python=3.12&gist=b5267ddec44bd725c263ebfba6e54b68). Pyre [agrees with pyright](https://pyre-check.org/play?input=from%20typing%20import%20overload%0A%0A%40overload%0Adef%20f(x%3A%20int)%20-%3E%20int%3A%0A%20%20%20%20...%0A%0A%40overload%0Adef%20f(x%3A%20str%2C%20y%3A%20int)%20-%3E%20str%3A%0A%20%20%20%20...%0A%0A%0Adef%20f(x%3A%20int%20%7C%20str%2C%20y%3A%20int%20%3D%200)%20-%3E%20int%20%7C%20str%3A%0A%20%20%20%20if%20isinstance(x%2C%20int)%3A%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20return%201%0A%20%20%20%20return%20%22%22%0A%0A%0Areveal_type(f(1%2C%202))%0A).

I don't have strong feelings here (I could see arguments in favor of either behavior), but it seems that if we don't have agreement on this algorithm between existing type checkers (and thus don't have a clear backwards-compatibility argument in favor of specifying one behavior), perhaps we should have some discussion of the arguments are in favor of specifying the more-complex algorithm? Or some input from mypy developers (@hauntsaninja?) on whether mypy would be willing to switch to the algorithm described here?

Author: I think mypy is using this same algorithm. Why do you think it isn't? In the mypy playground example that you provided, there are two overload signatures. Step one eliminates one, which leaves only one remaining. When it is evaluated as "as if it were a non-overloaded function call", it also fails, which leaves no valid overloads. Mypy reports the error as such. Perhaps the wording in mypy's error is leading you to believe that it's using some different process.

I purposely separated steps 1 and 2 to try to simplify both the description of the algorithm and the potential implementation. It's much cheaper to filter based on arity. Evaluating types of argument expressions is orders of magnitude more expensive — especially if they need to be re-evaluated for ever overload signature due to bidirectional type inference. It therefore doesn't make sense for a type checker to combine steps 1 and 2 if it cares about performance.

Reviewer: As far as I can see, the only way to observe the difference in the algorithm in the semantics, is by observing the inferred return type (and secondarily, the emitted diagnostics). Mypy infers a return type of Any, and does not emit argument type errors relative to any one overload. Both of these behaviors suggest that it is simply checking all overloads and concluding that no overload matches (consistent with the single-step algorithm), not picking the arity-matching overload as the winner and then checking the call normally relative to that overload. 

Pyright and pyre, in contrast, both infer the return type of the overload whose arity matches, not Any, and both emit errors about mismatched argument types, relative to only that overload. This behavior is consistent with the algorithm described here. 

I agree with you about performance, but I think the spec should concern itself with semantics, and I'm not sure which of the semantic differences above should be specified. 

The tests I've written currently specify the return type behavior of pyright and pyre in this case, and mark mypy as out of compliance because it says the return type as Any. If instead the linked behaviors of mypy and pyright should both be permitted by the conformance suite, I'm fine with that outcome, but in that case I don't believe the conformance suite can actually distinguisb between the algorithm as specified vs an implementation that combines step 1 and step 2.

Author: You can't draw any conclusions from the type that is evaluated for an errant call expression. The spec is (and should be) silent on what type should be evaluated in the face of an error. That's true of all expression types that result in errors of various types (syntactical and semantic). Once an error is reported, all bets are off in terms of what type you should expect for type evaluation. Mypy's evaluation of `Any` is reasonable for a type checker not associated with a language server. Pyright's behavior (where it attempts to "guess" the most likely intended return type) is more appropriate for a language server. I would object if someone were to propose that the spec should specify the evaluated type in the face of an error.

I think the description of the algorithm is simpler and clearer if steps 1 and 2 are separated. It sounds like you see it differently. I guess it's subjective.

Reviewer: Hmm. All type checkers, including mypy, currently always evaluate a call expression to the annotated return type of the called function, even if there are argument type or arity errors in the call. So it still seems that mypy is not really following the algorithm as described here, in that it is not evaluating the sole arity-matching overload as if that were the signature of the function.

I guess there is some ambiguity in what the overload spec means here, because we are attempting to specify overloads without having specified regular call evaluation yet. But if we assume that call evaluation would be specified to not mandate any return type when the call errors, then I think that there is no observable semantic difference between the one-step and two-step version of this part of the algorithm, so it's just a matter of which description is easier to understand. Since that's subjective, and there is some value in describing a more performant algorithm, I'm good with the current text.

I'll update the conformance suite to not expect any particular return type in case no overload fully matches.

Reviewer: > I'll update the conformance suite to not expect any particular return type in case no overload fully matches.

Done.

Step 3: If step 2 produces errors for all overloads, perform
"argument type expansion". Union types can be expanded
into their constituent subtypes. For example, the type ``int | str`` can
be expanded into ``int`` and ``str``.

Type expansion should be performed one argument at a time from left to

> right. Each expansion results in sets of effective argument types.

Author: Unions are unordered. This doesn't change that fact. This is saying that arguments should be considered left to right.

> right. Each expansion results in sets of effective argument types.

Reviewer 5: So this ordering requirement does not apply to the cartesian expansion of `(A | B, C)` to `(A, B)` and `(A, C)` then?

> right. Each expansion results in sets of effective argument types.

Author: I'm not sure I understand your notation. Does `(A | B, C)` mean that there are two arguments of type `A | B` and `C`, respectively? If my interpretation is correct, then the unexpanded argument list would be attempted first. If that fails, then the first argument's type would be expanded resulting in two argument lists `(A, C?)` and `(B, C?)`. I used the notation `C?` to indicate that the second argument expression will be re-evaluated using the bidirectional type inference context for each overload, so it may or may not evaluate to `C` in this pass. If both of these argument lists successfully match an overload signature, then the result is the (unordered) union of the return results for both of those overloads. If one fails, then `C` would be expanded if possible. This continues left to right until all arguments have been expanded.

> right. Each expansion results in sets of effective argument types.

Reviewer 5: > Does `(A | B, C)` mean that there are two arguments of type `A | B` and `C`, respectively?

Yes exactly, so similar to the example that follows after this line in the spec.

> then the first argument's type would be expanded resulting in two argument lists `(A, C?)` and `(B, C?)`

And should `(A, C?)` then be evaluated first and then `(B, C?)`, or is that not relevant here? 

The reason I'm asking is because I'd like to know whether it could affect type-checker performance if I place some "difficult-to-evaluate" type in the front of a union type or something.

> right. Each expansion results in sets of effective argument types.

Author: The specified behavior does not (and should not) depend on the order.

> right. Each expansion results in sets of effective argument types.

Reviewer: To expand on that: it looks like a type checker could be spec-compliant while choosing to short-circuit on the first expanded argument set that fails to match any overload. In that scenario, the order chosen for the expanded argument sets could potentially impact performance and/or error messages, but neither of those are specified behaviors; it wouldn't impact success or failure or return type of the call. So this is an implementation question, not a spec question. (And I think such a short-circuiting implementation would be a poor one in practice, because its error messages would be incomplete.)

For example, if there are two arguments whose types evaluate to
``int | str`` and ``int | bytes``, expanding the first argument type
results in two sets of argument types: ``(int, int | bytes)`` and
``(str, int | bytes)``. If type expansion for the second argument is required,
four sets of argument types are produced: ``(int, int)``, ``(int, bytes)``,

> ``(str, int)``, and ``(str, bytes)``.

Reviewer 6: I'd like to suggest adding that when a function is an overload implementation then some combinations may be further eliminated based on the overload definitions. This makes it easier to call one overloaded function from the implementation of another overloaded function with compatible type arguments. For example:
```python
from typing import overload

@overload
def take_varg(*arg: int) -> int:
    ...
@overload
def take_varg(*arg: str) -> str:
    ...

@overload
def take_varg2(*arg: int) -> int:
    ...
@overload
def take_varg2(*arg: str) -> str:
    ...
def take_varg2[T: (int, str)](*arg: T) -> T:
    return take_varg(*arg)

@overload
def take_pair(arg: int, arg2: int) -> int:
    ...
@overload
def take_pair(arg: str, arg2: str) -> str:
    ...
@overload
def take_pair2(arg: int, arg2: int) -> int:
    ...
@overload
def take_pair2(arg: str, arg2: str) -> str:
    ...
def take_pair2[T: (int, str)](arg: T, arg2: T) -> T:
    return take_pair(arg, arg2)
```
The above currently type checks in mypy but not pyright. I've used "value-constrained type variables" which based on a [related discussion](https://github.com/microsoft/pyright/issues/9475#issuecomment-2481225231) on pyright "are not well specified in the Python typing spec", and you recommend against using them.

Reviewer: I think these examples are valid if we add constrained type variables to the list of types that should be expanded in argument expansion (see the end of this doc). I don't think there's any argument that it is sound for a type-checker to do this, but @erictraut has expressed a preference for not specifying that type checkers must do it, because argument expansion can easily lead to explosion in the cost of checking calls.

After each argument's expansion, return to step 2 and evaluate all
expanded argument lists.

- If all argument lists evaluate successfully, combine their
  respective return types by union to determine the final return type
  for the call, and stop.
- If argument expansion has been applied to all arguments and one or
  more of the expanded argument lists cannot be evaluated successfully,
  generate an error and stop.

For additional details about argument type expansion, see
`argument-type-expansion`_ below.

> Step 4: If the argument list is compatible with two or more overloads,

Reviewer 3: This step seems unsound and it's not clear to me that the behavior it enables is commonly needed. Does this situation come up regularly?

Author: This behavior comes from mypy. There are various overloads in typeshed and in other popular stub libraries like pandas-stubs that rely on this behavior. For example, the `gather` function in `asyncio.tasks` use a fallback overload signature (the last one in the list) that should be used when an indeterminate number of args are passed to the function.

Why do you think it's unsound? If it is unsound, can you think of a modification or variation that would make it sound?

Reviewer 3: > Why do you think it's unsound? 

The test case (`check_variadic` in `overloads_evaluation.py`). If you call `check_variadic([1])`, `variadic()` will return a str but type checkers will infer int.

> If it is unsound, can you think of a modification or variation that would make it sound?

My naive answer would be that nothing special should happen here, so we will end up selecting all overloads that might match, combine their return types, and see what comes out. That would often be Any though. Even if we use a union instead, asyncio.gather would result in a very unwieldy type.

I'm fine with keeping this rule as a pragmatic way to get the desired behavior for gather-like functions, but I'd be happier if we found an approach that preserves soundness a bit more, or at least a narrower application of the rule.

Reviewer: I think a modification that would improve soundness would be to require that the overload with a variadic parameter return something that is assignable from the eliminated overload(s). In principle this is still compatible with the gather "fallback" scenario. In practice, for some reason the current `gather` stub returns a list rather than an indeterminate-length tuple in the fallback overload, even though it returns tuples in all the known-arity cases. Unless that were changed, it wouldn't be compatible with this tightening of the rules.

Author: > My naive answer would be that nothing special should happen here, so we will end up selecting all overloads that might match, combine their return types, and see what comes out.

If we were to omit step 4 and following the normal rules, we wouldn't "select all overloads that might match and combine their return types". The normal rules (in the absence of an argument that contains an `Any`) would choose the first matching overload, and I don't think that's what we want here. That means some special rule is needed to handle variadic parameters — or unpacked arguments of indeterminate length.

I see what you mean about unsoundness though, so maybe we need to reconsider the formulation of step 4. The variant that Carl suggests above seems like a reasonable proposal.

Here's another option to consider. Maybe we should focus on the _unpacked arguments_ rather than _variadic parameters_. This highlights an area of ambiguity for (non-overloaded) calls. The spec is currently silent about what to do when an unpacked argument of indeterminate length is matched against a list of parameters. Consider the following example:

```python
def func1(a: int): ...
def func2(*args: int): ...
def func3(a: int, b: str): ...
def func4(a: int, *args: str): ...

def test1(*args: int):
    func1(*args)  # OK
    func2(*args)  # OK
    func3(*args, "")  # Error
    func4(*args)  # Error
```

I made pyright agree with mypy in the above example, but this has always bothered me because I'm not convinced that mypy is correct (or consistent) in its behavior here. For example, if it accepts `func1`, why shouldn't it also accept `func3` and `func4`? I've received numerous bug reports and questions regarding these cases.

If we were to specify the behavior of unpacked iterables within a call expression in a way that is "tighter" (i.e. eliminates more false negatives at the expense of more false positives), it might help us simplify the overload resolution rules.

Then again, maybe we don't want to tackle this additional area of the spec at the same time as overloads.

Thoughts?

Reviewer 3: > for some reason the current gather stub returns a list rather than an indeterminate-length tuple in the fallback overload, even though it returns tuples in all the known-arity cases

The background for this is that gather() actually returns a list at runtime (in all cases). For the known-arity overloads, we currently lie and return a tuple because you can't have a heterogeneous list in the type system. It's an unfortunate situation without a great solution.

I'd need to think more about the other options discussed here. Regarding Eric's example about non-overload `*args` matching, I feel ideally the `func1(*args)` call should be an error, since it may fail at runtime. However, this might be unreasonably strict in practice.

Reviewer: > The background for this is that gather() actually returns a list at runtime (in all cases). For the known-arity overloads, we currently lie and return a tuple because you can't have a heterogeneous list in the type system. It's an unfortunate situation without a great solution.

Yes, I realized that after I made my comment. If we are already lying and saying it returns a `tuple`, it seems like it wouldn't make the situation any worse to have it return an indeterminate-length tuple in the fallback case, too, which would make it conform to the assignability rule I proposed above.

> I feel ideally the `func1(*args)` call should be an error

I feel the same (and mentioned it in another comment thread.) But it seems likely that this change would cause a lot of churn for existing users?

> Then again, maybe we don't want to tackle this additional area of the spec at the same time as overloads.

I think better specification of call checking would be a good idea, and would make the overload spec less ambiguous. Doing it in this PR would delay landing this PR, and make it even larger for reviewers -- but if it adds clarity, that might be an OK tradeoff?

Author: I've started [a new thread in the Python Typing forum](https://discuss.python.org/t/standardizing-argument-unpacking-behaviors-for-calls/80747) to see if we can get consensus on call checking — in particular, in cases where unpack operators are used in argument expressions. Let's see where that discussion goes.

determine whether one or more of the overloads has a variadic parameter
(either ``*args`` or ``**kwargs``) that maps to a corresponding argument
that supplies an indeterminate number of positional or keyword arguments.
If so, eliminate overloads that do not have a variadic parameter.

- If this results in only one remaining candidate overload, it is
  the winning match. Evaluate it as if it were a non-overloaded function
  call and stop.

> - If two or more candidate overloads remain, proceed to step 5.

Reviewer: This step seems to assume that unpacked arguments of indeterminate length should be matched to fixed numbers of parameters without error, even though this is unsound.

Clearly this is not sound, but it does appear to describe the actual behavior of [pyright](https://pyright-play.net/?strict=true&code=CYUwZgBGAUAeBcECWA7ALgSggWgHzPXgCgJSIAnENAV3JQliKNEgHNoAbRDpAZzQDaqNAF0seAmmJkKVWvRgAqDhiJA) (even in strict mode), [mypy](https://mypy-play.net/?mypy=latest&python=3.12&gist=636aa3e03e5be2a4ed7b4c1a7a17fe62), and [pyre](https://pyre-check.org/play?input=def%20f(x%3A%20int)%20-%3E%20int%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20x%0A%0Adef%20g(l%3A%20list%5Bint%5D)%20-%3E%20int%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20f(*l)%0A).

As far as I can find, this behavior is not specified anywhere.

Should we acknowledge in the text that this step assumes an unsound call binding strategy, which is not (yet?) specified?

Author: > This step seems to assume that unpacked arguments of indeterminate length should be matched to fixed numbers of parameters without error, even though this is unsound.

That is not what was intended. What I was trying to say is that `*args` and `**kwargs` parameters (which are of indeterminate length) should be matched against unpacked sequences or mappings of indeterminate length. 

The text does not say anything about matching a fixed numbers of parameters. It talks only about `*args` or `**kwargs`.

I guess that `*args` and `**kwargs` parameters can be of determinate length if they use an unpacked tuple or unpacked TypedDict, respectively, so maybe the text needs to be clearer to indicate that these cases are exempt from this rule.

Reviewer: > What I was trying to say is that `*args` and `**kwargs` parameters (which are of indeterminate length) should be matched against unpacked sequences or mappings of indeterminate length.

Yes, this is also what I understood.

The reason I took this to imply that "unpacked arguments of indeterminate length should be matched to fixed numbers of parameters without error", is that if the latter is not the case, then I don't see how step 4 could ever eliminate an overload that wasn't already eliminated by step 2. The overloads that could pass step 2 and then be eliminated by step 4, would be overloads where an unpacked argument of indeterminate length successfully ("without error", in order to pass step 2) matched against an overload without a corresponding variadic parameter.

So without the implication I mentioned, step 4 would be redundant.

Reviewer: I think this thread is a second case of "overload handling has to be built on top of some specification for binding a call to a single (non-overloaded) signature, and we don't have an explicit specification for that yet, which makes some things less clear in the overload spec"

Reviewer: > And this is immediately relevant to the conformance suite, because the only tests I could write for step 4 have to rely on "unpacked arguments of indeterminate length should be matched to fixed numbers of parameters without error", which means we are now at least implicitly specifying that.

Oh, actually, this is not true. The test I wrote would pass even if we required strict handling of indeterminate-length unpacked arguments. It would just pass because of step 2 instead, and step 4 would be redundant.

Author: > So without the implication I mentioned, step 4 would be redundant.

I see what you mean. Yes, both mypy and pyright allow an unpacked argument of indeterminate (unknown) length to match against a fixed number of parameters. That can produce false negatives, but flagging this as an error will produce false positives. Since it's a common use case in python, so I think it would be pretty annoying to emit an error for this case. Neither mypy nor pyright do. 

```python
from typing import Literal, overload

x1 = [1]
x4 = [1, 2, 3, 4]

def func1(p1: int, /) -> Literal[1]: ...

reveal_type(func1(*x1))  # No type checker error, no runtime error
reveal_type(func1(*x4))  # No type checker error, runtime error

@overload
def func2(p1: int, /) -> Literal[1]: ...
@overload
def func2(p1: int, p2: int, /, *args: int) -> Literal[3]: ...
def func2(*args: int) -> int: ...

reveal_type(func2(*x4))  # Literal[1] (pyright), Literal[3] (mypy)
reveal_type(func2(1, 2, *x4))  # Literal[3]
```

And yes, you're correct that without this behavior specified, it's still possible for two type checkers to be conformant with the existing spec but still differ in how they interpret overloaded calls.

Reviewer: Yeah, it seems like the lenient behavior shared by all type checkers is the one we'd need to specify here. So I don't really think any change to the spec text is needed.

Thanks for the example! It showed that my test for step 4 wasn't adequate, as it wasn't catching the fact that pyright doesn't seem to prefer the variadic (second) overload of `func2` for the call `func2(x4)`, where I believe this spec says that it should? I've updated the test to catch this.

Step 5: For each argument, determine whether all possible
:term:`materializations <materialize>` of the argument's type are assignable to
the corresponding parameter type for each of the remaining overloads. If so,

> eliminate all of the subsequent remaining overloads.

Reviewer: I think one thing that is unclear about the current wording of this paragraph is that it's not clear to how to interpret "for each argument" in the presence of multiple arguments. Even the example in the next paragraph doesn't really clarify this, since it only discusses one argument. Let's say there are two arguments in the call, and the first argument is as described in the paragraph below. Can we eliminate the third overload from consideration, according to this rule, before we even examine the second argument at all? That's what seems to be implied by the current wording.

> eliminate all of the subsequent remaining overloads.

Author: > Maybe reword this, or include some motivation why we have this rule

Yeah, I agree that it's not very clear. I've taken a stab at adding a motivation and a clearer example.

> Can we eliminate the third overload from consideration, according to this rule, before we even examine the second argument at all?

That's a good point. I think the rule needs to be changed from "for each argument" to "for all arguments".

Here's concrete example:

```python
@overload
def func(a: list[Any], b: list[str]) -> str: ...
@overload
def func(a: Any, b: list[Any]) -> float: ...

def test(a: list[Any], b: list[Any]):
    func(a, b)
```

I've updated the rule accordingly. I'll go back and add a more complete conformance test as a separate step.

> eliminate all of the subsequent remaining overloads.

Reviewer 7: Thanks, this is now easier to follow.

> eliminate all of the subsequent remaining overloads.

Author: @JukkaL, if you're good with the latest draft, please sign off [here](https://github.com/python/typing-council/issues/40).

For example, if the argument type is ``list[Any]`` and there are three remaining
overloads with corresponding parameter types of ``list[int]``, ``list[Any]``
and ``Any``. We can eliminate the third of the remaining overloads because
all materializations of ``list[Any]`` are assignable to ``list[Any]``, the
parameter in the second overload. We cannot eliminate the second overload
because there are possible materializations of ``list[Any]`` (for example,
``list[str]``) that are not assignable to ``list[int]``.

Once this filtering process is applied for all arguments, examine the return
types of the remaining overloads. If these return types include type variables,
they should be replaced with their solved types. If the resulting return types
for all remaining overloads are :term:<equivalent>, proceed to step 6.

If the return types are not equivalent, overload matching is ambiguous. In

> this case, assume a return type of ``Any`` and stop.

Reviewer: Is there a correctness requirement for the return type here to be assumed to be `Any`? It seems to me that it would also be valid for a type-checker to use the union of all the ambiguous matching overloads. I would prefer for the specification not to prevent that option.

Author: Existing stubs (including typeshed, numpy, pandas, and others) assume that the result will be `Any` in this case, so I don't think this is something we can change at this point. An earlier version of pyright generated a union, and it resulted in many false positive errors and lots of unhappy users. I think it's important for the spec to specify `Any` here so stub authors can rely on the behavior.

Reviewer: Hmm, ok, that's useful info, thank you. If you happen to know of any old pyright issues where unhappy users surfaced these problems with the union behavior, I would be curious to take a look at some real world cases relying on this.

Reviewer: I am not convinced that this is a point where it is in fact important for "stub authors to be able to rely on the behavior." The responsibility of stub authors is to accurately model their overloads. If a union (instead of `Any`) return type causes a false positive at a call site, and the overloads are correct, that's not a concern of the stub author, it's an issue of imprecise (dynamic) types at the call site, where perhaps some invariants are known but not expressed in an argument type. I think this is a reasonable candidate for type checkers to offer different levels of strictness depending on user preference.

If you have examples where a stub author would write their overloads differently because they are depending on this behavior, I would like to see those examples.

Reviewer 5: > I guess the precise construct one would need here in order to return a more precise type is something that I think has been requested before under the name `AnyOf`; effectively a "gradual union", or a gradual type which can materialize to any element of the union. (I think this type could also be formulated, given intersections, as the union of each element intersected with `Any`.)

That's a very interesting idea. If you consider `Any` as an opportunistic superposition of all possible types, then this gradual union would be an opportunistic superposition of the types within it. So in that sense it's a very natural way to generalize `Any`, by restricting it to only be able to assume a given subset of types. Nice!

Author: Interestingly, pyright internally generates an `AnyOf` type in this circumstance. From a typing perspective, it acts like an `Any`, but the additional information is used behind the scenes to provide better completion suggestions in the language server. For example, in this case the revealed type is `Any`, but the completion suggestions reflect the fact that the value must be of type `AnyOf[str, int]`.

<img width="360" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/625374aa-a053-431d-a02a-9f52d5ea489c" />

      # Step 2 eliminates the third overload. Step 5
      # determines that first and second overloads
      # both apply and are ambiguous due to Any, but
      # return types are consistent.
      r1 = example4(v1, v2)
      reveal_type(r1)  # Reveals int

      # Step 2 eliminates the second overload. Step 5
      # determines that first and third overloads
      # both apply and are ambiguous due to Any, and
      # the return types are inconsistent.
      r2 = example4(v2, 1)
      reveal_type(r2)  # Should reveal Any

.. _argument-type-expansion:

Argument type expansion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When performing argument type expansion, a type that is equivalent to
a union of a finite set of subtypes should be expanded into its constituent
subtypes. This includes the following cases.

1. Explicit unions: Each subtype of the union should be considered as a
separate argument type. For example, the type ``int | str`` should be expanded
into ``int`` and ``str``.

2. ``bool`` should be expanded into ``Literal[True]`` and ``Literal[False]``.

3. ``Enum`` types (other than those that derive from ``enum.Flag``) should
be expanded into their literal members.

> 4. ``type[A | B]`` should be expanded into ``type[A]`` and ``type[B]``.

Reviewer 3: This might be more clearly expressed by simply saying that `type[A | B]` is equivalent to `type[A] | type[B]`, but that's for a different chapter of the spec.

Author: The `type` section already specifies that `type[A | B]` is equivalent to `type[A] | type[B]`. All of the expansion rules in this list are examples of type equivalencies.

> 5. Tuples of known length that contain expandable types should be expanded

Reviewer 2: My understanding is that argument type expansion has to be in the overload rules because type checkers are already doing it, and library and stub authors are relying on it. But tuple expansion isn't currently done, right? Do we have evidence that this is useful/frequently requested? It seems potentially pretty expensive.

Author: Today, argument type expansion is done for union types and `type[A | B]`. It is not done for enums, bool, or tuples. 

Library and stub authors do rely on the existing expansion behavior, and I've received numerous requests for extending this to enums and bool. I don't recall ever receiving a request for tuples. I added it for completeness, since the typing spec does discuss type expansion of tuples in the [tuple chapter](https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/spec/tuples.html#type-compatibility-rules). 

I would be OK with not adding tuple expansion here, but I'm not sure what principle we'd use to justify _not_ expanding tuples but mandating expansion of these other equivalent types. Maybe we can justify it based purely on the fact that no one has explicitly requested the functionality.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the additional info! After re-reading the tuple chapter, I agree that it would be odd to mandate the expansion of a union of tuples but not an equivalent tuple of unions. I'm still worried about how costly this may be, but I suppose we could go back and change this later if it turns out to be unworkable for practical reasons.

into all possible combinations of their element types. For example, the type
``tuple[int | str, bool]`` should be expanded into ``(int, Literal[True])``,
``(int, Literal[False])``, ``(str, Literal[True])``, and

> ``(str, Literal[False])``.

Author: There is no limit prescribed by the spec. Individual type checker implementations may choose to apply such a limit. Pyright currently has an expansion limit of 64, but I will probably need to increase that in light of the new proposed rules. See [this issue](https://github.com/microsoft/pyright/issues/9784) for more context.

> 1. Explicit unions: Each subtype of the union should be considered as a
> separate argument type. For example, the type ``int | str`` should be expanded
> into ``int`` and ``str``.
> 
> 2. ``bool`` should be expanded into ``Literal[True]`` and ``Literal[False]``.
> 
> 3. ``Enum`` types (other than those that derive from ``enum.Flag``) should
> be expanded into their literal members.
> 
> 4. ``type[A | B]`` should be expanded into ``type[A]`` and ``type[B]``.
> 
> 5. Tuples of known length that contain expandable types should be expanded
> into all possible combinations of their element types. For example, the type
> ``tuple[int | str, bool]`` should be expanded into ``(int, Literal[True])``,
> ``(int, Literal[False])``, ``(str, Literal[True])``, and
> ``(str, Literal[False])``.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
1. Explicit unions: Each subtype of the union should be considered as a
   separate argument type. For example, the type ``int | str`` should be expanded
   into ``int`` and ``str``.

2. ``bool`` should be expanded into ``Literal[True]`` and ``Literal[False]``.

3. ``Enum`` types (other than those that derive from ``enum.Flag``) should
   be expanded into their literal members.

4. ``type[A | B]`` should be expanded into ``type[A]`` and ``type[B]``.

5. Tuples of known length that contain expandable types should be expanded
   into all possible combinations of their element types. For example, the type
   ``tuple[int | str, bool]`` should be expanded into ``(int, Literal[True])``,
   ``(int, Literal[False])``, ``(str, Literal[True])``, and
   ``(str, Literal[False])``.
```

Another important difference between type variables such as ``AnyStr``
and using ``@overload`` is that the prior can also be used to define
constraints for generic class type parameters. For example, the type
parameter of the generic class ``typing.IO`` is constrained (only
``IO[str]``, ``IO[bytes]`` and ``IO[Any]`` are valid)::

  class IO(Generic[AnyStr]): ...

Invalid overload definitions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Type checkers should enforce the following rules for overload definitions.

At least two ``@overload``-decorated definitions must be present. If only
one is present, an error should be reported.

> An overload implementation should be present for all overload function

Author: Good point. I'll update.

definitions. Type checkers should report an error or warning if an
implementation is missing. Overload definitions within stub files,
protocols, and abstract base classes are exempt from this check.

If an overload is decorated with ``@staticmethod`` or ``@classmethod``,
all overloads must be similarly decorated. The implementation,
if present, must be decorated in the same manner. Similarly, if one overload
is ``async``, all overloads must be ``async`` as well as the implementation.

> Type checkers should report an error if these conditions are not met.

Reviewer 9: This could stand to be slightly clearer in that it refers to coroutine functions defined using async def, and not all async functions.

A concrete example of an API that is allowed which could be considered async with one overload defintion, but not a coroutine function for contrast

```py
@overload
def get(self, *, wait: Literal[True]) -> Awaitable[T]:  ...
@overload
def get(self, *, wait: Literal[False]) -> T:  ...
def get(self, * wait: bool = True) -> Awaitable[T] | T: ...
```

Reviewer 10: We should take care to be clear that `def` overloads + `async def` implementation is fine (this makes some cases with async generators work better, see also https://discuss.python.org/t/overloads-of-async-generators-inconsistent-coroutine-wrapping/56665/9).

It might also be useful for the spec to explicitly mention that `yield` in the implementation body does not affect types of the overloads.

Author: Based on @hauntsaninja's point, it sounds like there is a desire not to enforce `async def` consistency for overloads. I'll delete that point and make it clear that a mixture of `async def` and `def` is supported.

> If one or more overloads are decorated with ``@final`` but the

Author: I agree that the same rule should apply to ``@override``. I'll add this.

Implementation consistency
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If an overload implementation is defined, type checkers should validate
that its signature is consistent with all of its associated overload
signatures. The implementation should accept all potential argument lists
that are accepted by the overloads and should produce all potential return
types produced by the overloads. In typing terms, this means the input
signature of the implementation should be assignable to the input signatures
of all overloads, and the return type of all overloads should be assignable to
the return type of the implementation.

If the implementation is inconsistent with its overloads, a type checker
should report an error::

  @overload
  def func(x: str, /) -> str: ...
  @overload
  def func(x: int) -> int: ...

  # This implementation is inconsistent with the second overload
  # because it does not accept a keyword argument ``x`` and the
  # the overload's return type ``int`` is not assignable to the
  implementation's return type ``str``.
  def func(x: int | str, /) -> str:
    return str(x)

Overlapping overloads
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If two overloads can accept the same set of arguments but have

> different return types, the overloads are said to "partially overlap".

Reviewer 10: "different" isn't quite the right condition, since we allow:
```
from typing import *
@overload
def func(x: Literal[0]) -> Literal[0]: ...
@overload
def func(x: int) -> int: ...
```

Author: Yes, you're correct. I'll correct the language.

This condition is indicative of a programming error and should
be reported by type checkers::

  # These overloads partially overlap because both accept an
  # argument of type ``Literal[0]``, but their return types
  # differ.

  @overload
  def func(x: Literal[0]) -> int: ...
  @overload
  def func(x: int) -> str: ...

> 

Reviewer 11: Could we add an example with kwargs here? Stating that bar should be keyword only for the second signature?

```python
@overload
def foo(*, bar: None = None) -> None: ...  # Overloaded function signatures 1 and 2 overlap with incompatible return types
@overload
def foo(*, bar: bool = ...) -> bool: ...
def foo(*, bar: bool | None = None) -> bool | None: ...
```

Author: Sorry, I don't follow you. Are you saying that you think a type checker should emit an error in this example? I don't think that's the case based on the rules. And mypy and pyright agree with this, since neither of them emit an error in this case.

Reviewer 11: Also see https://stackoverflow.com/questions/74901020/python-typing-mypy-errors-with-overload-overlap-when-signatures-are-different.

Reviewer 11: And https://github.com/python/mypy/issues/6580.

Author: My goal here isn't to provide positive and negative examples that cover all possible cases. That wouldn't be feasible. The code sample shows one one illustrative example. The general rule applies in all cases.

Author: I agree that the above example should be flagged as an error. Neither mypy nor pyright do today. I'll fix this in the next release of pyright. We should also include some of these examples in the conformance tests if/when this spec change is accepted.

For example, if there are two arguments whose types evaluate to
``int | str`` and ``int | bytes``, expanding the first argument type
results in two sets of argument types: ``(int, ?)`` and ``(str, ?)``.
Here ``?`` represents an unexpanded argument type.
If expansion of the second argument is required, four sets of
argument types are produced: ``(int, int)``, ``(int, bytes)``,
``(str, int)``, and ``(str, bytes)``.

After each argument expansion, return to step 2 and evaluate all
expanded argument lists.

- If all argument lists evaluate successfully, combine their
respective return types by union to determine the final return type
for the call, and stop.
- If argument expansion has been applied to all arguments and one or
more of the expanded argument lists cannot be evaluated successfully,
generate an error and stop.

For additional details about argument type expansion, see
:ref:`argument-type-expansion` below.

Step 4: If the argument list is compatible with two or more overloads,
determine whether one or more of the overloads has a variadic parameter
(either ``*args`` or ``**kwargs``) that maps to a corresponding argument

> that supplies an indeterminate number of positional or keyword arguments.

Author: > regardless of whether it's possible for the type checker to evaluate the unpacking to a fixed number of arguments

I don't think this is correct. An unpacking syntax doesn't always result in an indeterminate number of unpacked values. In cases where the unpacked number of values is determinate, we should use that knowledge for better static typing. For example, if you unpack a `tuple[int, int]`, you know that you're going to get precisely two `int` values. This is consistent with mypy's and pyright's current behavior.

> that supplies an indeterminate number of positional or keyword arguments.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the clarification. In that case, the wording here seems fine, but Example 3 below probably needs to be fixed. It currently has:
```
# Step 1 doesn't eliminate any overloads. Step 4
# picks the third overload.
val = [1, 2, 3, 4]
r3 = example3(*val)
```
but it sounds like `val` should be a non-constant for Step 4 to apply.

> that supplies an indeterminate number of positional or keyword arguments.

Author: `val` has the type `list[int]`, so unpacking it results in an indeterminate number of items. I'll make this clearer.

If so, eliminate overloads that do not have a variadic parameter.

- If this results in only one remaining candidate overload, it is
the winning match. Evaluate it as if it were a non-overloaded function
call and stop.
- If two or more candidate overloads remain, proceed to step 5.

Step 5: If the type of one or more arguments evaluates to a
:ref:`gradual type` (e.g. ``list[Any]`` or ``str | Any``), determine

> whether some theoretical :ref:`materialization` of these gradual types

Author: Hopefully the fixed samples will make this clearer. If not, let me know.

could be used to disambiguate between two or more of the remaining
overloads.

- If none of the arguments evaluate to a gradual type, proceed to step 6.
- If one or more arguments evaluate to a gradual type but no possible
materializations of these types would disambiguate between the remaining
overloads, proceed to step 6.
- If possible materializations of these types would disambiguate between
two or more of the remaining overloads and this subset of overloads have
consistent return types, proceed to step 6. If the return types include
type variables, constraint solving should be applied here before testing
for consistency.
- If none of the above conditions are met, the presence of gradual types
leads to an ambiguous overload selection. Assume a return type of ``Any``

> and stop. This preserves the "gradual guarantee".

Reviewer 9: I'm not sure this preserves the gradual guarantee as I understand it. The gradual guarantee starts with an assumption that the program being described can be coherently described and just either can't be in the current type system or hasn't been by the author. (That is, Any and other gradual types still represent a valid but unknown type if the program is consistent and sound)

If none of the above conditions are met, I believe this would not be a coherently describable function, and that the overloads are incorrect rather than imprecise.

Author: > If none of the above conditions are met, I believe this would not be a coherently describable function while being consistent with the overload defintions, which would mean that for the gradual guarantee to apply,we have to assume that it's a coherent program without defect, so the overloads would need to be incorrect rather than just imprecise.

I don't agree with that analysis. If you'd like to provide more details or examples that back up your analysis, please post to the typing forum thread.

      reveal_type(r1)  # Should reveal str | int

      # Here, the types of all three arguments are expanded
      # without success.
      example2(val, val, val)  # Error in step 3

Example 3::

  @overload
  def example3(x: int) -> int: ...
  @overload
  def example3(x: int, y: int) -> tuple[int, int]: ...
  @overload
  def example3(*args: int) -> tuple[int, ...]: ...

  def test():
      # Step 1 eliminates second overload. Step 4 and
      # step 5 do not apply. Step 6 picks the first
      # overload.
      r1 = example3(1)
      reveal_type(r1)  # Should reveal int

      # Step 1 eliminates first overload. Step 4 and
      # step 5 do not apply. Step 6 picks the second
      # overload.
      r2 = example3(1, 2)
      reveal_type(r2)  # Should reveal tuple[int, int]

      # Step 1 doesn't eliminate any overloads. Step 4
      # picks the third overload.
      val = [1, 2, 3, 4]
      r3 = example3(*val)
      reveal_type(r3)  # Should reveal tuple[int, ...]

Example 4::

  @overload
  def example4(x: list[int], y: int) -> int: ...
  @overload
  def example4(x: list[str], y: str) -> int: ...
  @overload
  def example4(x: int, y: int) -> list[int]: ...

>   def test(v1: list[Any], v2: Any):

Author: Yes, the example was incorrect. I'll fix it.

      # Step 4 eliminates third overload. Step 5
      # determines that first and second overloads
      # both apply and are ambiguous due to Any, but
      # return types are consistent.

>       r1 = example4(v1, 1)

Author: Yes, my examples were wrong. I'll fix them.

      reveal_type(r1)  # Should reveal int

      # Step 4 eliminates third overload. Step 5

>       # determines that first and second overloads

Reviewer 3: I think the second overload can't apply (and should be eliminated in step 2) because `[1]` is not a `list[str]`.

argument type. For example, the type ``int | str`` should be expanded
into ``int`` and ``str``.

2. ``bool`` should be expanded into ``Literal[True]`` and ``Literal[False]``.

3. ``Enum`` types (other than those that derive from ``enum.Flag``) should
be expanded into their literal members.

4. ``type[A | B]`` should be expanded into ``type[A]`` and ``type[B]``.

5. Tuples of known length that contain expandable types should be expanded
into all possible combinations of their subtypes. For example, the type
``tuple[int | str, bool]`` should be expanded into ``(int, Literal[True])``,
``(int, Literal[False])``, ``(str, Literal[True])``, and
``(str, Literal[False])``.

[Eric's note for reviewers: I'm not 100% convinced we should
support argument expansion in all of these cases. Tuple expansion,
in particular, can be very costly and can quickly blow up in complexity.
Currently, pyright and mypy support only the case 1 in the list above,
but I have had requests to support 2 and 3.]

When performing type expansion for an argument, the argument that
is targeted for expansion should be evaluated without the use of
any context. All arguments that are not yet expanded should

> continue to be evaluated with the benefit of context supplied by parameter

Reviewer 2: This (the use of context in evaluation) seems important and non-obvious (at least to me). I'd like to see it covered in its own section rather than only mentioned as an aside in argument type expansion.

Author: Yeah, I agree that it's important for consistent overload call evaluation. It should eventually be covered in more detail in other parts of the spec, but I'd prefer not to tackle that as part of the overload updates. This is already going to be a difficult set of updates to land. I'm not sure how to separate these other than to allude to context-based evaluation for now.

that are accepted by the overloads and should produce all potential return
types produced by the overloads. In typing terms, this means the input
signature of the implementation should be assignable to the input signatures
of all overloads, and the return type of all overloads should be assignable to
the return type of the implementation.

If the implementation is inconsistent with its overloads, a type checker
should report an error::

  @overload
  def func(x: str, /) -> str: ...
  @overload
  def func(x: int) -> int: ...

  # This implementation is inconsistent with the second overload
  # because it does not accept a keyword argument ``x`` and the
  # the overload's return type ``int`` is not assignable to the
  implementation's return type ``str``.
  def func(x: int | str, /) -> str:
    return str(x)

When a type checker checks the implementation for consistency with overloads,
it should first apply any transforms that change the effective type of the
implementation including the presence of a ``yield`` statement in the
implementation body, the use of ``async def``, and the presence of additional
decorators.

Overlapping overloads
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> If two overloads can accept the same set of arguments, they are said

Author: Hmm, that's a good point. This check would be pretty useless (i.e. way too noisy) if we were to interpret it in that way. Do you have any suggestions for how to restrict the rule? Maybe if we specifically say that "the potential of multiple inheritance should be ignored for purposes of this check". We'd presumably need to expand this to include all intersection types if/when they're added to the type system.

> If two overloads can accept the same set of arguments, they are said

Reviewer 3: Here's another example of overloads that mypy and pyright don't reject, but that do overlap in theory:

```
from typing import Protocol, overload

class HasFoo(Protocol):
    foo: int

class HasBar(Protocol):
    bar: str

@overload
def f(x: HasFoo) -> float: ...
@overload
def f(x: HasBar) -> bool: ...
def f(x: object) -> object:
    raise NotImplementedError
```

I don't have a good suggestion for an alternative way to phrase this rule.

> If two overloads can accept the same set of arguments, they are said

Reviewer: The purpose of the partial-overlap rule is to prevent unsoundness of this form:

```
@overload
def is_one(x: Literal[1]) -> True: ...
@overload
def is_one(x: int) -> False: ...

def f(x: int) -> bool:
    return is_one(x)

f(1)  # Presumably True at runtime, but type checker will say False (unless it performs inlining)
```

Where the runtime behavior may not match the inferred type of the call, because the type checker has correct but imprecise knowledge of the type of an argument.

The same unsoundness can occur with multiple inheritance:

```
@overload
def is_a(x: A) -> True: ...
@overload
def is_a(x: B) -> False: ...

class C(A, B): ...

def f(x: B) -> bool:
    return is_a(x)

f(C())  # True at runtime, type checker says False
```

And it can happen with overlapping structural types, as in Jelle's example: an object may actually conform to both protocols at runtime, but be statically typed as a less-precise type assignable only to the second protocol, resulting in incorrect inference.

I'm having trouble finding any principled reason why we shouldn't spec the rule as currently written here, since it seems correct. I'd be interested to see what actual typeshed overrides would fail this "presumed to be too noisy" version; it might illuminate what the real use cases are for overlapping overloads to violate this rule.

> If two overloads can accept the same set of arguments, they are said

Reviewer 3: Interesting, like Eric I had assumed that interpreting this rule strictly would be prohibitively noisy, but I looked over the overloads in typeshed's `builtins.pyi` just now, and the only clearly problematic case I could find was [`vars()`](https://github.com/python/typeshed/blob/f58dac1d62d33bb2255b762783d06463c40f5065/stdlib/builtins.pyi#L1759). This definition is indeed unsafe; here's an example of how it can be used to infer a wrong type: https://pyright-play.net/?pythonVersion=3.13&strict=true&code=GYJw9gtgBALgngBwJYDsDmUkQWEMoCCKcAsAFDkgCmAblQIYA2A%2BvAlQBQ30gDOHARgCUQyrQYs2nbnw6oYI8uQAmVYFGAcAHgC5CxITvJQTUanSatE0nvy2KKZVerTa9YAEYArKgGMFUAC0AHxQykj%2BANq8MCAANPpwALpGZKZmVDAAriAoUDJ2oo7mElbsHK7yIlAAxFC8ABZgAO68YREwCfT%2BWUyMcFAAsvQIyOgACuBacAAq1kA .

To describe the current state, we could add language saying that type checkers may use heuristics to skip reporting partial overlap in certain cases.

> If two overloads can accept the same set of arguments, they are said

Reviewer: I think the `vars` overload could be fixed to be compliant with this rule (and safe) by having the fallback overload return `Mapping`, which is assignable from `MappingProxyType`, instead of returning `dict`. But this wouldn't work if people are mutating the return value of `vars`. Which is only safe if they know the object passed in has a mutable `__dict__`, which the typing of `vars` can't verify; this unsoundness is explicit in the `Any` in the second overload.

It might make sense to extend the partial-overlap rule with a carve-out similar to step 5. That is, if overloads are partially overlapping, but some materialization of the second overload could make them not overlap at all, then we consider the possible unsoundness to have been explicitly requested, and we don't emit an overlap error.

> If two overloads can accept the same set of arguments, they are said

Author: I've taken a crack at incorporating the above feedback in the latest draft. Let me know if you think additional changes are needed.

> If two overloads can accept the same set of arguments, they are said

Reviewer: I would personally prefer to specify only the "gradual guarantee" exemption based on materialization, and not the exemptions for intersections (via multiple inheritance or structural types), because I think this is more principled and sound.

However, I recognize that's a change from the current behavior of type checkers, and it probably needs more exploration and experimentation in real-world codebases than just an audit of overloads in builtins. So I'm ok with specifying the status quo for now (I'm happy to at least see these exemptions specified as a "may"), and adding this to my list of future changes to consider.

to "partially overlap". If two overloads partially overlap, the return type
of the latter overload should be assignable to the return type of the
former overload. If this condition doesn't hold, it is indicative of a

> programming error and should be reported by type checkers::

Reviewer: @erictraut In another comment thread you mentioned that even in the presence of an "overlapping overload" error, resolution of the overload should still be possible and follow these rules as written. This makes sense, but it wasn't immediately obvious to me on my first read-through; there are of course cases where if there is a type error we have to just "give up" and fall back to `Any`. Maybe this is something we want to state explicitly? (That an overlapping-overloads error does not imply giving up on the overload resolution.)

overload candidates that are not plausible based on their
input signatures.

- If no candidate overloads remain, generate an error and stop.
- If only one candidate overload remains, it is the winning match. Evaluate
  it as if it were a non-overloaded function call and stop.
- If two or more candidate overloads remain, proceed to step 2.

Step 2: Evaluate each remaining overload as a regular (non-overloaded)
call to determine whether it is compatible with the supplied
argument list. Unlike step 1, this step considers the types of the parameters
and arguments. During this step, do not generate any user-visible errors.
Simply record which of the overloads result in evaluation errors.

- If all overloads result in errors, proceed to step 3.
- If only one overload evaluates without error, it is the winning match.
  Evaluate it as if it were a non-overloaded function call and stop.
- If two or more candidate overloads remain, proceed to step 4.

Step 3: If step 2 produces errors for all overloads, perform
"argument type expansion". Some types can be decomposed
into two or more subtypes. For example, the type ``int | str`` can be
expanded into ``int`` and ``str``.

> Expansion should be performed one argument at a time from left to

Author: This is a really slippery slope, and I wouldn't want to go there. 

It's very difficult and expensive to prove that the value of two expressions will always evaluate to the same runtime values even if their parse trees are identical. For local variables, it's probably pretty safe to make this assumption most of the time, although special care would need to be taken for things like augmented assignments. Anything more complex than local variables (e.g. outer-scoped variables, call expressions, attribute access expressions, index expressions) are much more difficult and expensive to prove.

The overload matching rules for Python are already _way_ too complicated in my opinion. I'm looking for ways that we can keep them as simple as possible, not make them more complicated.

> Expansion should be performed one argument at a time from left to

Reviewer: I agree that this logic would apply only to local variables. I have no issue with this behavior not being mandated by the spec, though I'd prefer if it weren't ruled out by the spec (and I don't think the current wording does rule it out.)

  two or more of the remaining overloads and this subset of overloads have
  consistent return types, proceed to step 6. If the return types include
  type variables, constraint solving should be applied here before testing
  for consistency.
- If none of the above conditions are met, the presence of gradual types
  leads to an ambiguous overload selection. Assume a return type of ``Any``
  and stop. This preserves the "gradual guarantee".

[Eric's note for reviewers: I'm struggling to come up with an
understandable and unambiguous way to describe this step.
Suggestions are welcome.]

[Eric's note for reviewers: Pyright currently does not use return type
consistency in the above check. Instead, it looks for non-overlapping
return types. If return types are overlapping (that is, one is a consistent
subtype of another), it uses the wider return type. Only if there is no
consistency relationship between return types does it consider it an
"ambiguous" situation and turns it into an Any. This produces better
results for users of language servers, but it doesn't strictly preserve
the gradual guarantee. I'm willing to abandon this in favor of a

> strict consistency check.]

Author: Yes, agreed. I'll update accordingly.

Step 6: Choose the first remaining candidate overload as the winning
match. Evaluate it as if it were a non-overloaded function call and stop.

Example 1::

  @overload
  def example1(x: int, y: str) -> int: ...
  @overload
  def example1(x: str) -> str: ...

  example1()  # Error in step 1: no plausible overloads
  example1(1, "")  # Step 1 eliminates second overload
  example1("")  # Step 1 eliminates first overload

  example1("", "")  # Error in step 2: no compatible overloads
  example1(1)  # Error in step 2: no compatible overloads

Example 2::

  @overload
  def example2(x: int, y: str, z: int) -> str: ...
  @overload
  def example2(x: int, y: int, z: int) -> int: ...

  def test(val: str | int):
      # In this example, argument type expansion is
      # performed on the first two arguments. Expansion
      # of the third is unnecessary.
      r1 = example2(1, val, 1)
      reveal_type(r1)  # Should reveal str | int

      # Here, the types of all three arguments are expanded
      # without success.

>       example2(val, val, val)  # Error in step 3

Author: I'll change this example to avoid any confusion.

Example 3::

  @overload
  def example3(x: int) -> int: ...
  @overload
  def example3(x: int, y: int) -> tuple[int, int]: ...
  @overload

>   def example3(*args: int) -> tuple[int, ...]: ...

Author: Yes, good catch. The rules should still be well defined in the presence of overlapping overloads (since they appear frequently even in typeshed), but the spec should probably steer clear of them in its own examples. I'll update.

      # determines that first and second overloads
      # both apply and are ambiguous due to Any, but
      # return types are consistent.
      r1 = example4(v1, v2)
      reveal_type(r1)  # Reveals int

      # Step 2 eliminates the second overload. Step 5
      # determines that first and third overloads
      # both apply and are ambiguous due to Any, and
      # the return types are inconsistent.
      r2 = example4(v2, 1)
      reveal_type(r2)  # Should reveal Any

.. _argument-type-expansion:

Argument type expansion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When performing argument type expansion, the following types should be
expanded:

1. Unions: Each subtype of the union should be considered as a separate
argument type. For example, the type ``int | str`` should be expanded
into ``int`` and ``str``.

2. ``bool`` should be expanded into ``Literal[True]`` and ``Literal[False]``.

3. ``Enum`` types (other than those that derive from ``enum.Flag``) should
be expanded into their literal members.

4. ``type[A | B]`` should be expanded into ``type[A]`` and ``type[B]``.

5. Tuples of known length that contain expandable types should be expanded

> into all possible combinations of their subtypes. For example, the type

Author: Yes, good point. I'll change.

``tuple[int | str, bool]`` should be expanded into ``(int, Literal[True])``,
``(int, Literal[False])``, ``(str, Literal[True])``, and
``(str, Literal[False])``.

[Eric's note for reviewers: I'm not 100% convinced we should
support argument expansion in all of these cases. Tuple expansion,
in particular, can be very costly and can quickly blow up in complexity.
Currently, pyright and mypy support only the case 1 in the list above,

> but I have had requests to support 2 and 3.]

Author: The downside to supporting all of this is that overload matching is already insanely complicated in Python — enough so that it takes pages of text to attempt to describe the algorithm. Contrast that to overload matching in most other languages (like TypeScript) where it simply evaluates overloads one at a time and picks the first match. I'm really looking for ways we can make this simpler. If I could go back in time, I'd try to convince the authors of mypy to not add all of this complexity. But now we're kind of stuck with much of it. I'm really hesitant to pile on more complexity.

> but I have had requests to support 2 and 3.]

Reviewer 12: Having personally implemented the overload logic myself recently I also feel like adding more complexity is a bad idea. Mypy also does union math in some places that could lead to pretty slow exponential calls if bools were always unpacked.

Before implementing overloads I thought that this would be pretty easy, but after doing it I feel like it's probably the most complicated part of Python's typing system.

> but I have had requests to support 2 and 3.]

Reviewer: I agree that overloads are complicated. But I think that once we have the current complex algorithm, with union expansion already in it, clarifying more forms of types that are equivalent to unions is not a significant addition to the overall complexity of the algorithm. Although it can add complexity to a concrete implementation, in principle I see it as rather a simplification, because equivalent types should not be specified in ways that make them behave as not-equivalent.

If there is major concern about supporting these in existing type checkers, I would at least like for the specification to be clear that all of these types are equivalent to unions, and thus it is permissible for a type checker to expand them as unions. There should not be any example in the conformance suite or any language in the spec suggesting that such an expansion would be wrong.

> but I have had requests to support 2 and 3.]

Reviewer 3: Yes, I think it's an important principle that if two types are equivalent, it should be possible to use them interchangeably. I don't know if it's always feasible for type checkers to follow this principle, but it's still something we should aim towards.

> but I have had requests to support 2 and 3.]

Author: Yes, these are good arguments. I've updated the document to spell out the general principle. I still give this list as specific examples, but I make it clear that this list might not be exhaustive. I think it is exhaustive today, but as we extend the type system — e.g. `TypeForm`, there may be additional examples. The same principle should cover all such cases in the future.

In this case, type expansion is performed on the first argument,
which expands its type from ``int | str`` to ``int`` and ``str``.
The expression for the second argument is evaluated in the context
of both overloads. For the first overload, the second argument evaluates
to ``MyDict[int]``, and for the second overload it evaluates to
``dict[str, int]``. Both overloads are used to evaluate this call,
and the final type of ``result`` is ``int | str``.

[Eric's note: mypy apparently doesn't do this currently. It evaluates all
arguments without the benefit of context, which produces less-than-ideal
results in some cases.]

[Eric's note for reviewers: We may want to provide for argument type expansion
for regular (non-overloaded) calls as well. This came up recently in
[this thread](https://discuss.python.org/t/proposal-relax-un-correlated-constrained-typevars/59658).
I'm a bit hesitant to add this to the spec because it adds significant
complexity to call evaluations and would likely result in a measurable slowdown
in type evaluation, but it's worth considering. We could perhaps mitigate the
slowdown by applying this behavior only when a constrained type variable is

> used in the call's signature.]

Reviewer: I think that we should support this for constrained TypeVars. As I noted above, the spec already says unequivocally that a constrained TypeVar is equivalent to an overload, and failing to expand unions for constrained TypeVars violates that equivalence.

I'm not sure I see where this expansion could ever be meaningful outside of overloads or constrained TypeVars? With a bound TypeVar, it would require a case where the union type of the argument is not a subtype of the bound, but the individual elements of the union are all subtypes of the bound? That seems impossible, as it would violate the definition of union subtyping.

Author: I wish I could also go back in time and prevent the introduction of constrained TypeVars. There's a good reason they don't appear anywhere in other programming languages. 

Doing argument expansion roughly triples the cost of evaluating a call expression. If there are nested call expressions (e.g. a call expression used within an argument expression for another call), these costs multiply. It's not uncommon in scientific code to have six or more nested layers. That could mean a 700x or more performance penalty just to support an edge case that almost never comes up in practice. I'm sensitive to this because I sometimes see this with nested calls that invoke overloads, and the performance impact can be huge. Pyright has a bunch of smarts to try to mitigate this overhead, but there's only so much that can be done. There are cases where evaluating one expression can take many seconds, which is really bad if the analyzer is powering a language server. (And no, implementing the type checker in Rust will not solve this problem. ;) Mypy also chokes on deeply-nested calls. I want to be careful about changing the spec to mandate support for some esoteric edge case if it's going to mean that millions of developers will be negatively impacted.

In any case, I don't think we need to decide this now for regular (non-overloaded) functions since this PR is focused on clarifications for the overload chapter. We can consider such a change in a future update.

Reviewer: > implementing the type checker in Rust will not solve this problem. ;)

Little-known fact: if you use Rust, all algorithms become O(1). True story ;)

The concern here makes sense. I'm ok deferring this to later consideration of constrained TypeVars. My argument would be that we already have this potential performance problem, with overloads, and I'm not sure that drawing what seems like an arbitrary line between overloads and constrained TypeVars (when, as the spec already clearly says, use of a constrained TypeVar should be equivalent to an overload) is the best way to address the performance issue. I would rather have the spec be internally consistent and correctly reflect the type-level equivalence, and then also consider holistically how the spec can allow type checkers to soften the potential performance impact of deeply nested union expansions, whether they occur with overloads or with TypeVars.

Put another way: it's also not exactly nice if changing a constrained TypeVar to the equivalent overload means that now your type checker hangs where it didn't before.

> [Eric's note for reviewers: What about expansion based on multiple inheritance?

Reviewer: Multiple inheritance is an intersection, not a union, so I don't think expansion serves any purpose. `A | B` is not a subtype of `A` or a subtype of `B`, which is why union expansion is needed. `C(A, B)` is already a subtype of both `A` and `B`, so expansion doesn't allow it to match any new overloads.

constraints for generic class type parameters. For example, the type
parameter of the generic class ``typing.IO`` is constrained (only
``IO[str]``, ``IO[bytes]`` and ``IO[Any]`` are valid)::

  class IO(Generic[AnyStr]): ...

Invalid overload definitions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Type checkers should enforce the following rules for overload definitions.

At least two ``@overload``-decorated definitions must be present. If only
one is present, an error should be reported.

The ``@overload``-decorated definitions must be followed by an overload
implementation, which does not include an ``@overload`` decorator. Type
checkers should report an error or warning if an implementation is missing.
Overload definitions within stub files, protocols, and abstract base classes
are exempt from this check.

If an overload is decorated with ``@staticmethod`` or ``@classmethod``,
all overloads must be similarly decorated. The implementation,
if present, must be decorated in the same manner. Type checkers should report
an error if these conditions are not met.

If one or more overloads are decorated with ``@final`` or ``@override`` but the

> implementation is not, an error should be reported.

Author: The idea behind this rule is that the implementation normally determines whether the function is `@final` or `@override`. However, there are cases where it's legitimate for an implementation to be omitted (e.g. in stubs or protocol definitions). In those cases, the `@final` or `@override` decorator needs to be applied to the overloads.

I agree that it would be simplest to enforce consistency. However, this isn't what type checkers do today. Mypy implements the rule as stated, and pyright copied it. My concern about changing the rule in the spec is that it will cause a lot of churn in existing code bases. Maybe the simplification is worth it? I could go either way here. 

@carljm, what are your thoughts now that you have this additional context?

> implementation is not, an error should be reported.

Reviewer: I'm not intending to advocate for any change to the rule here, I'm just trying to understand what the rule is; I don't think the current text is sufficiently clear.

I think I'm gathering from your reply that the current text should be understood as a narrow rule determining "under what circumstances should a type checker issue an error specifically regarding improper use of `@final` or `@override` on overloads?" But that's not the only question that must be answered here. If the rule is anything more complex than "all or nothing," then this text also needs to clarify under what circumstances a type checker should consider the overloaded method as actually decorated with `@final` or `@override`.

These are the questions I asked in my original comment:

> Is it is permissible to decorate the implementation with @final or @override, but not the overloads? Is it permissible to decorate some overloads, but not others? If any of these are permissible, what is the meaning of this mixed decoration?

I think I gather from your reply that these are both permissible, because the current text does not specifically prohibit them. And I think I also gather that if there is an implementation present, the presence or absence of the decorator on the implementation is all that really matters. I still don't know what the interpretation should be if some overloads are decorated and others are not, and there is no implementation.

> implementation is not, an error should be reported.

Author: Yes, I see your point. I took another shot at this. It turns out that mypy's and pyright's behaviors differ slightly here. I think that both of them are reasonable and defensible, but we should converge on one. I've opted to specify mypy's behavior since its implementation predates pyright's.

Overloads are allowed to use a mixture of ``async def`` and ``def`` statements
within the same overload definition. Type checkers should desugar all

> ``async def`` statements before testing for implementation consistency

Author: Good point. I'll change the phrasing to avoid this term.

Here's the new proposed text: "Type checkers should convert ``async def`` statements to a non-async signature (wrapping the return type in a ``Coroutine``)..."

it should first apply any transforms that change the effective type of the
implementation including the presence of a ``yield`` statement in the
implementation body, the use of ``async def``, and the presence of additional
decorators.

Overlapping overloads
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If two overloads can accept the same set of arguments, they are said
to "partially overlap". If two overloads partially overlap, the return type
of the latter overload should be assignable to the return type of the
former overload. If this condition doesn't hold, it is indicative of a
programming error and should be reported by type checkers::

  # These overloads partially overlap because both accept an
  # argument of type ``Literal[0]``, but their return types
  # differ.

  @overload
  def func1(x: Literal[0]) -> int: ...
  @overload
  def func1(x: int) -> str: ...

[Eric's note for reviewers: Mypy exempts `__get__` from the above check.
Refer to https://github.com/python/typing/issues/253#issuecomment-389262904
for Ivan's explanation. I'm not convinced this exemption is necessary.
Currently pyright copies the exemption. Do we want to codify this or leave it

> out?]

Reviewer: (The special case as I framed it here would be expressible directly in the type system, without special handling in type checkers, if we had intersection/negation types.)

Step 2: Evaluate each remaining overload as a regular (non-overloaded)
call to determine whether it is compatible with the supplied
argument list. Unlike step 1, this step considers the types of the parameters
and arguments. During this step, do not generate any user-visible errors.
Simply record which of the overloads result in evaluation errors.

- If all overloads result in errors, proceed to step 3.
- If only one overload evaluates without error, it is the winning match.
  Evaluate it as if it were a non-overloaded function call and stop.
- If two or more candidate overloads remain, proceed to step 4.

Step 3: If step 2 produces errors for all overloads, perform
"argument type expansion". Some types can be decomposed
into two or more subtypes. For example, the type ``int | str`` can be
expanded into ``int`` and ``str``.

Expansion should be performed one argument at a time from left to
right. Each expansion results in sets of effective argument types.
For example, if there are two arguments whose types evaluate to
``int | str`` and ``int | bytes``, expanding the first argument type
results in two sets of argument types: ``(int, ?)`` and ``(str, ?)``.

> Here ``?`` represents an unexpanded argument type.

Author: The reason I used `?` is to emphasize that these are not expanded argument types, so they should be evaluated using normal evaluation rules. If the type checker uses inference context (as all static type checkers do), they should apply context in this case rather than using the type evaluated without context.

That may be getting too detailed and subtle for the spec given that inference context (aka bidirectional type inference) isn't mentioned anywhere else in the spec currently.

I'll remove the `?` because it has the potential to add confusion.

  for the call, and stop.
- If argument expansion has been applied to all arguments and one or
  more of the expanded argument lists cannot be evaluated successfully,
  generate an error and stop.

For additional details about argument type expansion, see
`argument-type-expansion`_ below.

Step 4: If the argument list is compatible with two or more overloads,
determine whether one or more of the overloads has a variadic parameter
(either ``*args`` or ``**kwargs``) that maps to a corresponding argument
that supplies an indeterminate number of positional or keyword arguments.
If so, eliminate overloads that do not have a variadic parameter.

- If this results in only one remaining candidate overload, it is
  the winning match. Evaluate it as if it were a non-overloaded function
  call and stop.
- If two or more candidate overloads remain, proceed to step 5.

Step 5: If the type of one or more arguments evaluates to a
type that includes a :term:`gradual form` (e.g. ``list[Any]`` or
``str | Any``), determine whether some theoretical
:term:`materialization <materialize>` of these gradual types could be used
to disambiguate between two or more of the remaining overloads.

> - If none of the arguments evaluate to a gradual type, proceed to step 6.
> - If one or more arguments evaluate to a gradual type but no possible
>   materializations of these types would disambiguate between the remaining
>   overloads, proceed to step 6.

Reviewer: These two bullet points still use the term "gradual type" in an imprecise way, since all types are gradual types.

Since all types are gradual types, and all types can be materialized (though the only possible materialization of a fully static type is itself), I think this step would be simpler if it eliminated all conditionality based on the original argument type, and just discussed materialization directly. E.g. change the first paragraph to:

> Step 5: determine whether any possible materialization of any argument type could disambiguate between two or more of the remaining overloads.

And collapse these two bullets to one:

```suggestion
- If no possible materialization of any argument type would disambiguate between the remaining
  overloads, proceed to step 6.
```

Author: I took another swing at redefining this rule, and I'm much happier with the latest version. It's somewhat different (and more precise) than what you are proposing above. It's also subtly different from what mypy and pyright implement today, but I think it's more aligned with the concept of type manifestations and the "gradual guarantee".

- If possible materializations of these types would disambiguate between
  two or more of the remaining overloads and this subset of overloads have

>   consistent return types, proceed to step 6. If the return types include

Reviewer: What does "consistent return types" mean here? Does it mean "earlier overload return type must be a subtype of later overload return type," as above with partial overloads? If so, let's be explicit.

Also, do we proceed to step 6 here with the full set of matching overloads that entered step 5, or only with the subset that can be disambiguated by materialization?

If two overloads can accept the same set of arguments, they are said
to "partially overlap". If two overloads partially overlap, the return type
of the former overload should be assignable to the return type of the
latter overload. If this condition doesn't hold, it is indicative of a
programming error and should be reported by type checkers::

  # These overloads partially overlap because both accept an
  # argument of type Literal[0], but the return type int is

>   # not assignable to str.

Reviewer: I feel like I'm making too many comments on this PR, so feel free to ignore/resolve, but: would it make sense to give the rationale for some of these rules? For instance, a shortened version of my description of the rationale for the partial-overlap here: https://github.com/python/typing/pull/1839/commits/cce3879e735f401fdd4fe0654913d0d23c351076#r1733640526

I realize the rationale is not strictly required for the spec to clarify how type checkers should behave. But practically speaking, understanding the rationale can be very useful for readers of the spec, including type checker authors, and future maintainers/updaters of the spec. For the benefit of reviewers of this PR, you dug up and linked a past comment on a mypy issue that dug into the rationale for the rules specified here. Can we save future spec maintainers some similar digging, by preserving some of that rationale in the spec text itself?

(If you think this is a reasonable idea, but don't have time to do it yourself, I'm also willing to do it as a separate follow-up PR.)

Author: The current text justifies this by saying "If this condition doesn't hold, it is indicative of a programming error". I think it's fine to expand on this somewhat, but I don't know that we need to go into a lot more detail.

Could you remind me how you phrased your rationale? The link above doesn't seem to work.

Reviewer: Here's how I phrased the rationale. I think it requires a short example for clarity:

```
The purpose of the partial-overlap rule is to prevent unsoundness of this form:

```
@overload
def is_one(x: Literal[1]) -> True: ...
@overload
def is_one(x: int) -> False: ...

def f(x: int) -> bool:
    return is_one(x)

f(1)  # Presumably True at runtime, but type checker will say False
```
```
